In this video, I'm going to push the two smartest
AIs to their limit. Gemini 3 can create beautiful
one-shot scenes, like this one it created to
introduce itself. And I'll be comparing it to GPT
5.1, or more specifically GPT 5.1 Codex Max (Extra
High), but that's not quite as catchy. For really
difficult tasks, these are apparently the two best
AIs in the world. So, I'm going to test them on
complex simulation tasks that require planning,
testing, and iterating over time. The first is a
bird flocking simulation set in a beautiful
nature scene, and the second will be a full
city simulation with people and traffic. First
is bird flocking. It has to be a 3D simulation
with realistic bird flocking behavior. I want it
set in a beautiful nature scene with vegetation,
trees, and any extras the model wants to add. I
also want a bird view where the camera follows
a bird to see what it's like to be in the flock.
It has to use ThreeJS, which is the most popular
JavaScript animation library. If you've seen some
of my other videos, you know the models are pretty
good at animating with it. They can use any other
tools they like, and it has to have basic controls
for looking around the simulation. That's a lot
to get done all at once. So, I'm going to use
agentic coding tools to let the models work for a
long time on the task. I'll use Gemini 3 with the
Gemini CLI and I'll use GPT 5.1 Codex Max with
the Codex CLI. Both with maximum reasoning. The
models have to run the simulation themselves to
test it and take screenshots to view what their
simulation actually looks like and see what can be
improved. And I'm going to ask that every element
is as detailed and realistic as possible. I'll add
the full prompt in the video description if you're
interested. This is Gemini 3's bird flocking
simulation. We can see straight away the birds
are flocking in a pretty realistic way. And the
nature scene looks like a foggy river delta with
3D terrain, trees, rocks, and transparent
streams. Although, if you look closely,
the trees don't actually touch the ground. It's
quite a big world, and the birds explore a lot
of it if you let it run. But they do get caught in
these circles. It has the controls we asked for to
tune the simulation parameters like how close the
birds like to fly to each other and their speed.
And if you mess with it, you can get some weird
behaviors. The bird view is exactly what I wanted,
but can be a bit shaky and sometimes breaks. But
here we can get an idea of how the simulation
works. Each bird is flying around independently
based on some rules like when to turn towards or
away from nearby birds. And the flocking behavior
you see is emergent from these individual bird
rules rather than being programmed in at a high
level. Gemini didn't bother to make the birds
interact with the environment and they go straight
through the trees and the ground. But overall,
I'm pretty impressed with Gemini getting this on
its first try with no intervention from me. GPT
5.1 Codex's bird flocks seem a bit more fluid and
natural, but a few seconds in, they do go flying
out of the world and into the abyss, but they do
eventually come back. The trees meet the ground
correctly for this one, but the water feature is
nowhere near as good as Gemini's. The bird mode
is very smooth and looks great when the birds are
actually flying over the world. And the birds do
hit the ground on this one, which is a bit weird,
but I guess more realistic than Gemini's birds,
which go straight through the ground. We have
the simulation controls similar to Gemini's,
which includes bird ground clearance, but even
with that all the way up, they still sometimes
hit the ground. If you play around with the
controls, you can get some weird flocks. I found
this lonely bird and managed to catch the moment.
It detects a nearby flock and turns to join it.
Codex's birds were much nicer to play with than
Gemini's, but Codex also made the biggest mistake
of letting the birds fly off the map. To me, they
both did really well with different pros and cons,
so I'm going to make the next challenge even more
difficult to see if they can handle it. The next
challenge is to build an entire city. I want it
to be a 3D simulation in ThreeJS. It has to have
buildings, streets, vegetation, parks, and other
things that should go in a city. It needs to have
people walking around and cars driving around
with realistic traffic interactions. I'm going
to use the agentic coding tools again to let the
models run and test their code, take screenshots,
and iterate based on what they see. Here is Gemini
3's city. It took a few tries. It built a couple
of cities that just didn't work, and it could
clearly see they didn't work from the screenshots,
but it just didn't care. And even after I asked
Gemini to fix it, it just pretended that it was
fixed. But eventually it built this city which
has cars and people walking around just like I
asked. These parks are scattered around and each
one is a bit different. The people have a little
walking animation and they walk on the sidewalks
although some of the sidewalks are missing and
they use the road crossings but they do not care
for red lights and they walk straight through
cars. The cars do drive on the road and stop at
traffic lights but the rules are a bit strange.
Like this car is driving on the right and then
switches to the left. After about a minute, this
causes the entire city to get backed up while cars
wait for someone on the wrong side of the road
to move. You can also change the time of day and
nighttime has a very different vibe. But overall,
I'm going to say this is a pretty good job from
Gemini 3. Codex's city looks okay from a distance,
but is full of weird issues. Half of the
streets are oriented the wrong way and
things just seem to be placed randomly.
Like trees are in the middle of the road
and traffic lights don't point the right way. I
thought the cars were driving sideways at first,
but the lights and everything are on the right
way, so they are just very wide. The traffic
only really functions for about 10 or 15 seconds.
Then the cars just seem to stop and never start
again. The people are also nowhere near as good
as Gemini's. They kind of just float around and
have no walking animation. Overall, I'm going to
give Codex a fail on this one. There are just too
many issues. I gave it a couple of tries, too,
because Gemini had a couple of failed attempts.
It was much more reliable than Gemini at getting
it working, but it just couldn't get it much
better than this. I think the main issue is it
just doesn't look at the screenshots properly,
so it just misses obvious glaring issues
right in front of it. Even though I love
Codex and use it everyday, I'm going to say
Gemini wins this comparison. It did struggle
with the agentic coding more than GPT 5.1 Codex,
but its spatial reasoning is on another level.
Thanks for watching. I'll put the full prompt and
process I use in the video description. Cheers.